>> Chris Moore: Good morning.
My name is Chris.
So Motion has been a huge topic in iPhone OS since day one.
We love it.
You guys love it and most importantly customers love it.
Now, as Steve hinted out on Monday, we have some great new
Motion sensing capabilities that we're bringing to the table
in iPhone 4 and iOS 4 and will
talk about those in this session.
Will tell you what those features are.
How you can access them in your code.
Then, we're really deep dive into some of the features
and give you a good understanding of what they are.
Finally, we'll write some code.
But before we get to any of that, let's talk about an idea.
This is an idea that one of my coworkers
proposed a few months ago and I like it.
He said, wouldn't it be neat if we could write
the game on iPhone where, this is a boxing game,
where in order to punch, you rotate the phone left and right
and the game would be smart enough so that if you did sort
of a level rotation, the character would give a level punch.
And if you did a more upward rotation,
it would do an upper cut.
Furthermore, wouldn't it be neat if we
could have the user translate the phone left
and right or perhaps backward to dodge.
I think this would be a really
neat app to see in the app store.
And with the in mind, let's talk about where
we are today with Motion sensing in iPhone OS.
So as you're all aware, every iPhone OS device that we've
ever shipped has an accelerometer and this measures the sum
of gravity plus whatever acceleration the user is giving the
device and we call that second component user acceleration.
Now, these two things are useful for
measuring different physical actions.
So you can use gravity to measure rotations.
When the user rotates the phone left and right or
forward and backwards that will show up as a change
in the direction of gravity with respect to the device.
Similarly, we can use user acceleration
to measure shakes or translational motion.
Unfortunately, in order to try to disambiguate
gravity from user acceleration, we need to filter.
We need to use a low-pass filter to isolate
gravity or rotational motion or a high-pass filter
to isolate user acceleration or translational motion.
And unfortunately, that filtering
introduces some side effects.
So the more heavily we low-pass filter, for
instance, the more user acceleration we're able
to remove and so the more stable our signal is.
However, the more latency we introduce.
Now, one other disadvantage of using the accelerometer
is that it cannot detect rotations around gravity.
So to help make that a little more clear, let's
imagine that we have an iPhone that's flat on the table
so that gravity in this case is going into the screen.
And we spin that while keeping it flat on the table.
That would be a rotation around gravity and that
would not be picked up by the accelerometer.
So with that in mind let's go back to this boxing idea.
Can we do this with only the accelerometer?
So what would we need to do this?
Well, we'd really want to be able
to measure rotation around gravity.
That's because that sort of the natural most
intuitive user motion to trigger up a punch.
Unfortunately, we can't really do
that with just the accelerometer.
We also want this to be able to accurately measure
rotation when the user is rotating the device very fast.
Fast rotations are kind of the
most natural action for punching.
And unfortunately, this is a place where
the accelerometer has particular trouble.
Because the faster the user rotates the device,
the harder it is for them to hold it steady.
And so the more user acceleration, we tend to
have bleeding into that accelerometer data.
Now, as I mentioned, before we can
combat that by using a low-pass filter.
But unfortunately, the more heavily we
low-pass filter the more latency we introduce
and fast rotations are exactly when
that latency is most noticeable.
Furthermore, we'd want this to accurately
be able to measure rotation in the phase
of high translation or user acceleration and vice versa.
So you could imagine the user dodging and punching at the
same time and we don't want to be confused with the other.
So unfortunately the accelerometer is not a particularly
good choice for implementing a game like this.
Now, starting in iPhone 3GS and now iPad
and iPhone 4 we introduced a magnetometer.
And this sensor has been incredibly useful.
We use it as a digital compass and that data is
available through the core location framework.
Many augmented reality apps were
basically made possible by this sensor.
And it helps us deal with that first bullet
point that I mentioned on the last slide.
It can actually detect rotations about gravity.
Unfortunately, it's not particularly
responsive and not particularly well suited
for high speed applications such as games.
The sensor itself is very noisy and it's in
an environment that's very noise magnetically.
iPhone OS and iOS devices are just jam-packed with
electronics that have an effect on this sensor.
So it doesn't really help us for that game.
So that's where we are today with
motion sensing in iOS, in iPhone OS.
Let's talk about what we're introducing
in iPhone 4, a gyroscope.
Now, this measures very accurately the rate at
which the device is rotating about all three axes.
And by itself that raw gyroscope data can be
incredibly, incredibly useful and we provide
that to you through a new framework in iOS.
However, we went a step further.
Because that gyro data is much, much more useful when
we fuse it with accelerometer data using algorithms
that we have developed and provide to you in iOS 4.
And we call the output of those algorithms device motion.
So what does device motion include?
Well, it includes the full 3-Dimensional Attitude of the
device and you also can-- might call this orientation.
Now, from this full 3D attitude, we can extract an estimate
of the direction of gravity with respect to the device.
That's much, much less noisy and much
cleaner with respect to user acceleration
than any low-pass filter could give
us on the raw accelerometer data.
It also includes an estimate of user
acceleration without using a high-pass filter.
And this estimate is much less susceptible
to influence by rotational motion
than any high-pass filtered accelerometer
data would give you.
It also included the instantaneous
rotation rate of the device.
Now, I mentioned that the gyro
itself measures the rotation rate.
But the rotation rate that you get from
device motion is slightly different
from that and I'll talk about that later on.
So, I mentioned that the estimate of gravity that we can
extract from device motions attitude output is much better
for measuring gravity than the accelerometer data is.
And it doesn't need any low-pass filter to help.
So let's look at why that is.
Now, there are really two reasons that you need to low-pass
filter the raw accelerometer data to extract gravity.
One is to deal with noise from the
accelerometer itself and then the other
as I mentioned before is to filter
out that user acceleration.
So let's look at these two components in turn.
So if we look at the component of gravity
along an axis that's perpendicular to gravity,
so let's say we have a phone that's sitting flat on
the table and we look at gravity along maybe the Y-axis
of the phone that's parallel to the table itself.
Ideally, that would be all zeros.
Let's look at what the raw accelerometer
data on an iPhone 3GS would look like.
This is raw data straight from a
phone, it didn't' do anything to it.
Now, one thing that might jump out
at you is the data is quantized.
It's really restricted to two values here.
And the reason is that the accelerometer in the iPhone
3GS and earlier products is relatively low resolution.
It has a resolution of 8 bits and we're seeing
that quantization in the noisy data here.
Now, if you've ever played around
with the accelerometer on an iPad,
you might have noticed that the data looks a little
better than in earlier products and that's true.
The accelerometer in the iPad is upgraded
and one of the main ways that it's better is
that it has a 12-bit resolution instead on an 8-bit one.
And I'm happy to say that the iPhone 4 has the
same upgraded accelerometer that's in the iPad.
So what does the noise look like
from this upgraded accelerometer?
Well, it's a lot better.
But you can still see it even on the scale.
Let's look at device motions gravity output along
that same axis, very, very clean, very low noise.
No filtering needed because of that.
Let's look at sensitivity to user acceleration now.
Again, this is the second reason that we
need to filter the data to extract gravity.
So if we look at this, at the component of gravity
along an axis that's perpendicular to gravity,
as we shake the device back and forth along that axis.
So we're not rotating.
It's a pure translation.
Again, ideally, that component would be all zero.
What do we see on the accelerometer data?
Well, it looks like this.
As expected that user acceleration shows
up directly in the accelerometer data.
That's what we need to filter out.
Now, I recorded this data directly from an iPhone 4
and while I was recording that raw accelerometer data,
I also recorded the device motion
gravity estimate along that same axis.
So it's important to note that the
motion the device was seeing is the same.
So the device motion gravity date
looks like that, much, much cleaner.
No filtering needed to remove that user acceleration.
So with that in mind, let's go back to our boxing idea.
Can we do this now?
Well, recall that we need to be able to
measure rotation about gravity accurately.
We have that covered with the gyro.
We need this to be accurate for
fast rotations and now we can do
that because we can accurately separate
rotational motion from translational motion.
Furthermore, we need to accurately be
able to measure rotation in the phase
of high user acceleration and vice versa.
And again, because we can cleanly separate
rotation from translation, we can do that.
So I for one can't wait to see
something like this in the app store.
So [background applause] thanks.
Thanks. So what else can we do?
Well, I mentioned the boxing game and that's pretty neat.
We also see this being very useful for things
like flying games where you can very smoothly
and accurately point the nose of
the aircraft in three dimensions.
Many driving and racing games on the iPhone currently use an
estimate of gravity that they extract from the accelerometer
in order to allow the user to steer left and write.
So a tilt left and right would be steer.
In some cases a tilt forward and
backward would accelerate or brake.
Now, let's say we add another degree of freedom to
this rotation and we take advantage of this rotation
around gravity to, for instance aim a turret.
So you can add a whole new capability to your game.
Or let's say that you have a game that,
in which the users driving in some sort
of open cockpit car like a go-cart for instance.
And it's kind of pesky.
You have other drivers occasionally coming up right
next to the user and trying to run them off the road.
Wouldn't it be cool if you can allow the user to
shake the device left or right to punch left or right
and really get those pesky drivers off their tail?
So our tree games or shooting games in
general can really benefit from this.
The most natural rotation to aim left and
right is again a rotation around gravity
and we can very accurately measure that now.
Simulation games such as skateboarding
games can really benefit.
It really expands the space of gestures
that you can accurately recognize
and use to trigger things like skateboarding tricks.
So we're really excited about this.
And to demonstrate some of the new capabilities,
I like to invite my friend Patrick to the stage.
Patrick?
>> Patrick Piemonte: Hi everyone.
My name is Patrick.
And before we go, exploring some of
the points Chris just talked about.
I'd like to remind you that if you to the
conference website and then go to this talk,
you can find the same demo associated with this talk.
So I recommend you to check it out.
So here we have an iPhone 4 and I'll unlock
it and we have our Core Motion Teapot app
and this is the same App you can
download from the conference page
and you can see were in an accelerometer mode.
So at first I'd like to point out that if
we could look at our Euler angles of pitch.
So if I tilt the device up, you can see the Teapot response
and we can do our roll and you can see the Teapot response
to roll but you'll notice that there isn't yaw.
So what we're really measuring right now is two components.
We're measuring both gravity and
as Chris said user acceleration.
So as I touch the device, you can see that
the Teapot does a little bit of a wiggle.
So that's the user acceleration Chris described.
And you can see it if I move the device laterally, you
can see how the Teapot still has that little wiggle.
Now there's ways to mitigate this with filtering.
So we have a gravity filter built-in
here and I can turn that up
and you'll notice that we reduced that user acceleration.
But the tradeoff is now we have a higher latency.
So you can see the Teapot response a little bit more slowly.
So user acceleration is good because it has it's-- some of
its applications so that what makes shake gestures possible,
pedometers and applications of that nature.
But if you want precise game control,
you need to isolate the gravity component
and focus on that and remove that user acceleration.
So just a kind of talk about this in a little
more detail, we have a translation mode
and this translation mode will translate the Teapot a
distance that's proportional to that user acceleration.
So what that means is we'll redraw the Teapot
a distance away from the center depending
on how much user acceleration it's experiencing.
So as you can see it, kind of moves around
the screen like a rubber band effect.
And if I roll the device you could see how
much the Teapot is moving a distant there.
So now I'll turn off translation mode and now
we'll go into our device motion algorithms.
So now this is the fusion between the raw gyro
and accelerometer data with Apple's algorithms.
And as you could see immediately, the Teapot is very
responsive and we have our Euler angles of pitch
and we have roll and now we also have yaw.
[ Applause ]
So, we'll revisit those points I just
talked about with the accelerometer.
So, as you can see if I do lateral
movement, the Teapot is very steady.
As you remember in-- this is accelerometer
and now device motion.
There's a drastic difference.
Now, lastly we can go into translation mode.
Now, before as you could see I was rolling the device
and when I roll the device here you could see
that the Teapot stayed in the center of the screen.
And if I switch back into accelerometer mode,
remember how much the sensor was moving?
So that can give you an idea now using the device motion
algorithms how much control you have over the motion
of the device and how much you can isolate that
motion and separate out the user acceleration.
So now I'd like to hand in back over to Chris.
>> Chris Moore: Thank you, Patrick.
[ Applause ]
Alright, so now that you guys know, we've had
an overview of what these new features are.
Let's talk about how you can access them in your
applications and you'll do that using a new framework
that were introducing in iOS 4 called Core
Motion and it's very, very easy to use.
So what can you get from Core Motion?
Well, you can get the raw accelerometer data.
Now, this is exactly the same data
that you can currently get
from the UIAccelerometer API just
with a different interface.
You can also get the raw gyro data
that I talked about earlier,
as well as this great sensor fused device motion data.
So, let's talk about availability.
All three types of data are supported on iPhone 4.
But unfortunately, older platforms do
not have the gyroscope that's necessary
to get obviously the raw gyro data and device motion.
So only the raw accelerometer data
will be available on older hardware.
So what are the main objects in Core Motion?
Well, there's CMMotionManager which will
be your main interface into Core Motion.
It's how you will start and stop
various types of data as well
as tell us how often you want to receive different data.
You can also query for what data is available
on the platform that your app is running on.
The raw accelerometer data is stored
in instances of CMAccelerometer data.
The raw gyro data is stored in instances in instances of
CMGyro data, and device motion is stored in CMDeviceMotion.
Now, there's one other component with the CMDeviceMotion
that we'll spend some time talking about later.
So I wanted to mention it now and that CMAttitude.
So, excuse me, there is no simulator
support for Core Motion.
Mac just don't have the necessary sensors to support this.
So it's device side only.
So there are two main method s that
you can receive data from Core Motion.
You can have Core Motion push data
to you and this uses blocks.
So when you use this, you'll need to
provide an NSOperationQueue and a block
that will be called once per sample of data.
You can also pull data from Core Motion and we
expect most games will actually use this approach.
Here, you periodically asked CMMotionManager
for the latest sample of data.
Now, this is often done when your view is updated.
For instance, in a CA display link callback.
And there are some tradeoffs to these two approaches.
So let's talk about those.
Push has the advantage that you
will never miss a sample of data.
You have a queue backing you up.
So if we send you a hundred samples of data in one
second, you will get all hundred of those samples.
Now, there is some increased overhead
involved in this approach.
And in many, many cases if your threads are running a little
behind so that you have multiple samples of data queued up,
really the best course of action is simply
to cut your losses, ignore the older samples
and only focus on that latest sample of data.
We can't really do that with this approach.
So, we would recommend this approach
mostly for data collection apps
or if your app is using some algorithm
that's very, very sensitive to drop samples.
Now, I should mention that every sample of data that you
get from Core Motion has a time tag associated with it.
So you can always determine how many samples
you've missed if you do use the pull approach.
Now, this generally is more efficient.
There is usually less code required especially
if you already have some periodic event coming
in like a CA display link callback that determines
when you render a frame and when you want data.
Now, the disadvantage is that you may need an
additional timer to tell you when to pull data
if you don't already have one of these
periodic CA display link type events coming in.
Despite that, this is what we would
recommend for most applications in games.
So, let's talk about threading very briefly.
Now, Core Motion creates its own thread and it
does this to handle data from the sensors as well
as run those device motion algorithms
that fused the accelerometer in gyro data.
So this has some ramifications for you.
That means that if you have Core Motion push data to
you, the only code that will be periodically executed
on your thread is the code in the block that you send us.
If you're pulling data, Core Motion
will never interrupt your threads.
So how do you use Core Motion?
Very simple.
There are three steps, setup, retrieving data, and clean-up.
Now, a good place to set things up is for
instance in startAnimation, if you have a game.
So here we create a CMMotionManager instance.
All we do is allocate and initialize one.
No arguments.
It's very simple.
Next, we need to determine whether the
data that we're interested in is available.
And in this example, we're going to
be interested in device motion data.
So we have a property in CMMotionManager called
isDeviceMotionAvailable that you want to check.
And as always, if that data is not supported on the
platform the user is using you want to fail gracefully
or provide some other way for the
user to interact with you application.
Next, we set the desired update interval
of the data and we do that in this case
by setting the deviceMotionUpdateInterval property
and we set this to the desired interval in seconds.
So here, let's say were interested
in 60 Hz data, so we set it to 1/60.
Now, I should mention that we're going to be pulling data
in this case but even though we're doing that we still want
to set this desired update interval that will tell Core
Motion how often it needs to get data from the sensors.
Next, we start updates.
So were interested in pulling data so all
we do is call startDeviceMotionUpdates.
No arguments necessary.
If we were interested in having Core
Motion push data to us using blocks,
then we would call
startDeviceMotionUpdatesToQueue:withHandler to queue
with handler and give that NSOperationQueue and the
block that we wanted to handle each sample of data.
The next step is to retrieve data.
Now, if we were using blocks, our block will just be
executed whenever a new sample of data is available.
Here we're pulling data so all we need
to do is read the appropriate property
from our motion manager whenever we're interested in data.
Here we're doing it when our view is updated.
So that property for device motion
data is just called device motion.
Clean-up. So I should mention that you always want
to stop sensor data as soon as you're done with it.
That will allow us to turn off the necessary
sensor hardware and in some cases algorithms
that are processing it and ultimately
save the users battery.
So, here we started device motion data.
So we simply call stopDeviceMotionUpdates and then
we go ahead and release our motionManager instance.
Very, very simple.
So to summarize this section, there are two methods
that we can use to receive data, push and pull.
Push uses blocks.
With pull, all you do is periodically look at the
desired property of the CMMotionManager, very simple.
Next, all processing by Core Motion
is done on its own thread.
Finally, there are three steps to using Core Motion,
setup, retrieving data, and cleanup, very simple.
So, now that you have an idea of how
to use the API let's really deep dive
into what this new device motion data contains.
So as I mentioned before, device motion data is stored in
instances of CMDeviceMotion and that has a few properties.
There's a property called "attitude" which contains
that full 3-dimensional attitude data
that's going to be so incredibly useful.
It also contains an estimate of gravity with respect o
the current-- to the device's current reference frame.
Now, I mentioned earlier that we can actually
extract this estimate from the attitude data directly
and I'll still show you how to do
that later on to illustrate a point.
But in reality, you actually won't need to do that
because we extracted for you in CMDeviceMotion
and we do that because many of you have applications
that currently low-pass filter the accelerometer data
to estimate the direction of gravity and we want to
make it as easy as possible for you to take advantage
of this new sensor fusion of accelerometer
in gyro data that we provide.
So all you have to do is start using device motion
and look at that gravity property and you can get rid
of that low-pass filter that you're currently using.
We also provided and estimate of
user acceleration with CMDeviceMotion
without using a high-pass filter that's
much better isolated from rotational motion.
And then the instantaneous rotation rate of the device.
So let's look at those middle two properties first.
Called the middle two are gravity and user acceleration.
And these are both stored in instances of
very simple struct called "CMAcceleration."
Three components X, Y, and Z giving the acceleration
along each of those axis in units of G's.
And the coordinate frame that we're using in Core Motion
is exactly the same as the one that is currently used
by the UIAccelerometer API for the accelerometer data,
as well as core location for the raw magnetometer data.
Namely, the Z-axis is positive coming out of the screen of
the device, the Y-axis is positive running towards the top
of the device, and the X-axis is positive running out of the
right side of the device or the Micro-SIM tray on iPhone 4.
Now, rotation rate-- sorry, one more thing.
So I mentioned that you can get rid of your low-pass
filter to isolate gravity using the raw accelerometer data.
Now, if you use device motions gravity output instead.
But you don't want to completely forget what you know
about low-pass filtering because the user acceleration data
that you get from device motion will
contain noise from the accelerometer.
So you probably want to low-pass filter
that to smooth it out a little bit.
So here, we're showing a very, very
simple nonadaptive low-pass filter.
You can get as fancy as you want.
And we encourage you to play around
with different filtering parameters
and really determine what's best for your application.
Now, let's look at rotation rate.
So this property is an instance of CMRotationRate which is
again a very, very simple struct giving the rotation rate
and units of radians per second around
the X, Y, and Z-axis of the device.
Now, if you remember back to physics class, you probably
studied the right-hand rule and that's what we'll use
to determine the direction of positive
rotation rate around an axis.
So to review, if you were to take your hands and
wrap it around an axis so that your thumb points
in a positive direction of the axis, then the direction
that your fingers curl will give the direction
of positive rotation rate and that
shown by the blue arrow on the slide.
Now, I mentioned earlier that CMDeviceMotion's
rotationRate property is different
from the raw gyro data that you get from CMGyro data.
How does it differ?
It differs in bias.
So the raw gyro data has a bias associated with it.
Now what that means is if the device
is not rotating, so let's say,
it's sitting flat on a table, then
the gyro will not read zero.
It will read some nonzero value that actually differs
from device to device and even within a given device,
it changes with a lot of things that you really have no
control over, things such as the temperature of the gyro.
Now, one of the main jobs of these device
motion algorithms that we've implemented is
to actively track and remove bias from the gyro data.
And we provide that bias corrected gyro data to
you through CMDeviceMotion's rotationRate property.
Now, let's talk about-- let's talk about
my favorite property of CMDeviceMotion
and that's that full 3-Dimensional attitude.
Now, you might also call this the orientation of the device.
But fundamentally what it is, is it's a rotation.
It's a rotation from a fixed reference
frame that Core Motion chooses,
and I'll show you exactly what that is on the next slide.
But it's a rotation from that reference
frame to the device's current frame.
And as with any rotation, there are a number
of ways that you can express it mathematically.
You can use a rotation matrix; you can use a Quaternion;
or you can use Euler angles, pitch, roll, and yaw.
And we provide all three of those
representations to you through CMAttitude.
Now, let's talk about this reference frame.
So it's chosen when your application
first calls startDeviceMotionUpdates.
And it's chosen in such a way that
the Z-axis is always vertical.
So that means that if you were to express gravity in this
reference frame, it would be equal to the vector 0, 0, -1.
Now, the X and Y-axes are both orthogonal to gravity.
They're in the horizontal plane.
And of course they're orthogonal to each other.
But it is not the case for instance that X always
aligned with North of Y is always aligned with North.
So they're rotated in arbitrary
amount with respect to North.
So all three reference frames that you see up there
now, North, East and Up, X1, Y1, Z1 and X2, Y2,
and Z2 are equally valid reference
frames for Core Motion to choose.
So let's go through an example to really hammer this home.
I mentioned earlier that you can extract
from that 3-Dimensional attitude an
estimate of gravity in the device's frame.
This is how you do that.
So let's say we have an instance of device motion and we
extract a rotation matrix representation of its attitude.
Now, recall that that attitude is the rotation from that
fixed reference frame to the device's current frame.
Now recall the gravity when expressed in that fixed
reference frame is always equal to the vector 0, 0, -1.
So, if we have a function that multiplies a 3x3 matrix
by a three-element vector and returns the result,
we call that the result will be exactly
equal to device motion's gravity property.
Or mathematically deviceMotion.gravity is equal
to that rotation matrix times vector, 0, 0, -1.
So many applications that are currently on the app store
that use the accelerometer data to estimate gravity want
to measure rotation not from the
reference frame for instance,
that Core Motion chooses or gravity
is always along the - Z-axis.
But they want to measure rotations from some more
comfortable resting orientation for the user.
And we provide a function to make
that really easy in CMAttitude
and that function is called multiplyByInverseOfAttitude.
So how does it work?
Well, let's look an example.
Let's say that you're writing a game and when
you render your first frame of animation,
you want to grab the device's orientation
and use that as you reference frame.
That's the reference resting orientation
that you want to give the user.
So all you have to do then is retain the-- in
instance of CMAttitude for that orientation.
So here, we'll do that and will call it referenceAttitude.
Then, on subsequent frames, all you have to do
is grab the current attitude from Core Motion
and that will give the rotation from Core Motions
fixed reference frame to the device's frame
and then you can use this multiplyByInverseOfAttitude
function
to change the reference frame to
variable reference attitude.
So after calling that, variable
attitude will contain the rotation
from reference attitude to the device's current frame.
And to demonstrate that, I'd like to
invite Patrick back up to the stage.
Patrick.
[ Applause ]
>> Patrick Piemonte: In device motion, not using
accelerometer and just device motion and you notice
that we are basically rotating the Teapot right now by
the inverse of the attitude coming from Core Motion.
So with the spout aligned here along
the X-axis, the rotation is identity.
So that means that the device's frame is
aligned with the frame of Core Motion.
So if your user will probably-- if your user is playing the
game in a different orientation and you'd like to change
that reference frame for future updates in your
app, you can cache a sample as Chris described
and then all future samples you can use that function
multiplyByInverseOfAttitude with that cached attitude.
And from that point forward, you'll have a new reference.
So we do that here in this test application when
you hit those reset reference attitude button.
So you see how the spout lined along the X-axis again.
So now the Teapot will rotate from that orientation.
So now, we're going to take deep dive into the code
and look at the same Core Motion Teapot
application that we've been showing you.
So again, this is available on the
session website associated with our talk.
So we have the Teapot project open here.
And the first thing you'd like to do is actually
add the Core Motion framework to your project.
So now, we have the project added
and the project is pretty small.
We have our app delegate and we have our primary view and
then we have an abstraction for our accelerometer filtering.
Now, we're going to integrate the
Core Motion into the view itself.
So here will just drop in our header and I will
switch over to our implementation of the view.
And we need to first allocate our Core Motion manager.
So we do that in our start animation.
So we'll allocate our motion manger.
And once we have our motion manger
allocated, now we can configure it.
So we would like to set up our--
basically, our sensor data intervals.
So you could do that pretty easily
with-- by setting these two properties.
For accelerometer, we have accelerometer update interval.
And for device motion, we have
device motion update interval.
And in this particular case, we're
setting it to a 100 hertz for each.
[ Pause ]
So now that we have our motion
manager configured, our App will--
so we could start updating the specific sensor
based on the mode our application is in.
So you simply call startAccelerometerUpdates.
And for motion updates, you would
just call startDeviceMotionUpdates.
Now, since all iOS devices have shift to the
accelerometer, there is a property that check
if the accelerometers available but will
need to check if device motion is available.
And in this particular application we will enable
the Device Motion button on a Teapot app based
on the fact if device motion is available or not.
So, on iPhone 4 this will return yes, the device motion
is available property and that's everything to set up.
So, now we have our apps setup and we need to begin drawing.
So if we go to our drawing method, if you attended
the game designed sessions on Tuesday morning,
they talked about your draw views you should read
in you accelerometer input before doing
a lot of your drawing in the screen.
And we do the same here.
So we will actually have our-- I will take in our
user input first which is the device motion data.
So for accelerometer data--
[ Pause ]
-- we have our accelerometer data properties.
So there're two styles as Chris mentioned.
We have our block-based mechanism
and then we have-- which is push.
In this particular case, the Teapot
app uses the pull method.
So what we are doing is we're checking the property every
time we draw the Teapot on the screen and rendering it
with the latest data that Core
Motion has seen from the sensors.
And of course, the core in the device motion
operation, device motion mode, we can do the same.
So again, we're checking our device
motion property of the motion manager.
And then in that device motion property, we're grabbing
the attitude and that's what we used to rotate the Teapot.
Now, we had shown this in our second
demo the multiplyByInverseOfAttitude.
So if you've cached that reference attitude,
this is where it actually gets used.
And that's everything for servicing the data.
Now, just to wrap up when we call stopAnimation.
[ Pause ]
We will stop the accelerometer updates.
Stop our device motion updates and
then we'll perform our clean up.
So that's how the Teapot app works.
Thank you.
[ Applause ]
>> Chris Moore: Thanks, man.
So recall that the new information
that you can get on iPhone 4
through Core Motion is the full
3-Dimensional attitude of the device, a much,
much improved estimate of user acceleration
that's not influence by rotational motion
and does not require a high-pass filter, as well
as the instantaneous rotation rate of the device.
So what do we do with this new
sensor under the hood in iPhone 4?
Well, if you went to the Core Location talk yesterday,
you probably heard about us using it for GPS aiding
and we do this if you specify that you
want navigation accuracy in Core Location.
We don't do it by default because it uses a
little extra power and it's predominantly useful
when the device is mounted in the car and you are
in areas where the GPS quality is relatively low.
So if you're driving around downtown San
Francisco, that's a perfect time to use this.
And the gyro will greatly improve position and
especially Core's information that you get from GPS.
This will be a huge help to map matching
applications that use both position and course
to figure out which road to snap you two.
We also used for compensating under the hood.
So if we detect an abrupt change in magnetic
interference by comparing the compass
and gyro data then we can coast using the
gyro data until that interference goes away.
Let's talk about what's more interesting now.
What can you do with this?
Well, we see gaming as being obviously
a huge application of it.
And we've talked about some things
that games could use it for.
But it can also be a huge help to
augment in reality applications.
After you get that initial compass fixed, you can switch
over to using gyro and get much, much more responsiveness.
3D visualization and mapping apps were
really be possible now and much, much more.
We have been absolutely blown away by the amazing
things that you guys have done with the accelerometer
and the magnetometer and we can't wait to see what you
can do with this new sensor and this new algorithms.
For other sessions, the game design
sessions are being repeated tomorrow morning.
Unfortunately, the other three related sessions have
already happened but you can check out the videos online.
So if you would like to learn more, you can contact
Allan Schaffer, he's our Graphics Evangelist as well
as the documentation and forums that we have
available on our Apple Developer website.